---
layout: post
title: starting with network and data communications
description:
modified: 2013-05-31
category: Network and Data communications
tags: network topology mesh communication
imagefeature: cover6.jpg
comments: true
share: true
---
# Network
Let  us  start  with  the  basics  now since  we  are  learning  about 
networks  and  communication  we  should  know  what  does  a 
network  means.  If  we  understand  the  basic  literary  meaning 
of  network  it  means  connections  between  some  entities  in 
the real world. For example, a group of friends it can be said 
we  have  a  network  of  friends  who  reside  in  different  places 
and  we  communicate  with  them  through  words  if  we  are 
together  or  we  need  to  take  a  medium  like  a  car,  bus  etc  to 
meet them. In this case car, or bus is   medium which carries 
us.  
Now  you  would  say  we  can  make  a  call  via  telephone  or 
mobile  instead  of  meeting  the  friend  directly.  Now  do  you 
know  what  is  the  medium  here.  It  is  the  telephone  wires  or 
wireless communication which we are going to study later. 
Let    us    get    back    to    our    definition    of    network. In 
communication  technology  we  define  network  as  a  set  of 
devices connected by media links.
Just as we must be able to understand the language in which 
a  person  speaks  to  communicate  with  us,  similarly  devices 
must   also   be   able   to   follow   similar   set   of   rules   to 
communicate with each other. These   set   of   rules   that   govern   data   communication   are 
known   as   protocol.   They   are  standards   in   which   all   the 
devices must communicate so that the information passed is 
understood  by  every  communicating  device  to  which  the message is sent.

Now  we  know  that  we  have  communication  links  between 
devices to communicate, but how are they layed in a network 
and how are the links connected. Are there a number of ways 
of  arranging  and  connecting  the  devices?  The  answer  is  yes, 
there are different ways and the way  a network is laid down 
logically or physically is known as a Topology. 


There  are  six  types  of  topologies,  some  are  basic  and  some 
are derived from them. Let us study them one by one


Mesh  Topology:  Every  device  has  a  dedicated  point  to  point 
link to every other device. 
If there are n devices then no. of links=n(n-1)/2


Star Topology: Each device has a dedicated point to point link 
only to central controller usually called a hub. 


Tree  Topology:  is  a  variation  of  star.  Some  are  connected  to 
central  hub  and  majority  of  devices  are  connected  to  a 
secondary hub that in turn is connected to central hub. 


Bus  Topology:  Its  is  a  multipoint  one  long  cable  acts  as  a 
backbone to link all devices in a network. 

Ring  Topology:  Each  device  has  a  dedicated  point  to  point 
line configuration only with the two devices on either side of 
it. 
Signal is passed along the ring in one direction from device to 
device until it reaches its destination. 


Hybrid   Topology:   It   is   network   that   combines   several 
topologies as sub-network linked together in a larger way. 

We will continue with different networking devices in the next article.
